[Amit Varma]: A couple of days ago, a friend visited Mumbai from out of town.
[Amit Varma]: I went to pick him up at the airport.
[Amit Varma]: And while we were driving off, my friend asked, so how's the weather in Mumbai?
[Amit Varma]: And I said, great, no problem at all.
[Amit Varma]: And then I realized that my instinctive response came from the fact that I was sitting in an
[Amit Varma]: AC car, and I work in an AC room all day.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, the weather is good where I am.
[Amit Varma]: But what is it like outside?
[Amit Varma]: Of course, there are simple indicators that can tell us the state of the weather, the
[Amit Varma]: temperature, humidity level, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But if someone asks you, how is the economy doing?
[Amit Varma]: That's a slightly harder question.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Unknown]: Our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: This episode tries to take a snapshot of what the economy looks like today, four years after
[Amit Varma]: the Narendra Modi government came to power.
[Amit Varma]: Now figuring out economic performance is always complicated.
[Amit Varma]: It's a whole separate discussion on whether GDP has any value as a measure, especially
[Amit Varma]: in a country with such a large informal economy.
[Amit Varma]: But let's leave that for another day.
[Amit Varma]: Even if you do have what you consider reliable numbers, you don't have counterfactuals.
[Amit Varma]: The numbers could be XYZ.
[Amit Varma]: But what if oil prices hadn't stayed low, or the monsoons hadn't been good all this
[Amit Varma]: time, or demonetization had not happened, or if Hillary Clinton instead of Donald Trump
[Amit Varma]: became US president, a million little factors affect the economy, and it can all get a bit
[Amit Varma]: too much.
[Amit Varma]: Anyway, to try and make sense of where we are today, four years after 2014, one year
[Amit Varma]: before 2019, I have with me my good friend and a frequent guest on the show, Vivek Kaul.
[Guest]: Vivek, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks Amit for having me over.
[Amit Varma]: Vivek, rather than, you know, start talking about the economy in very broad sort of macro
[Amit Varma]: terms and in generalizations and so on, I thought we can start by talking about some
[Amit Varma]: specific subjects that you've written recent columns on, and use those as a lens to then
[Amit Varma]: examine the broader changes that are sort of going through the country.
[Amit Varma]: One of your interesting pieces recently was on Air India.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, it's always been an agenda of the reformers that we need to sell Air
[Amit Varma]: India for obvious reasons, the losses have now become staggering and we the taxpayer
[Amit Varma]: pays for it.
[Amit Varma]: And last year, the government, in fact, did announce that they are going to privatize
[Amit Varma]: Air India, though many suspected they didn't mean to, it was a sop for some of the reform
[Amit Varma]: minded supporters.
[Amit Varma]: Where do things stand now?
[Guest]: So, Amit, you know, Air India is up for sale, we know that, but the terms of the sale, make
[Guest]: it very, very difficult for anyone to buy that airline.
[Guest]: Now, what is on offer currently is essentially 76% of Air India and 100% of Air India Express,
[Guest]: which is the low cost arm of Air India.
[Guest]: Along with that, any airline buying, you know, Air India has to take on two thirds of the
[Guest]: debt of Air India.
[Guest]: Now, these two thirds of the debt is not a small amount, it amounts to around 32,300
[Guest]: crores.
[Guest]: Out of a total of 48,000 crores, which if you translate into dollars is close to $5
[Guest]: billion.
[Guest]: So it is for any Indian airline, it will be like a death knell.
[Guest]: So obviously, they are not interested in buying the airline, I mean, Indigo, SpiceJet and
[Guest]: Jet Airways have all made that clear.
[Guest]: The other thing is, the airline which buys Air India needs to ensure that they do not
[Guest]: fire any employees of Air India for one year.
[Guest]: After that, they can offer, you know, voluntary retirement schemes, which is another huge
[Guest]: thing because, you know, when an airline starts operating, you know, they may want to do something,
[Guest]: they may not want to do something.
[Guest]: So you have to leave them to, you know, let them operate Air India in the best way that
[Guest]: they think is possible.
[Guest]: The third interesting thing is that, you know, the trade unions can create a lot of mayhem,
[Guest]: which they already are.
[Guest]: So all these factors make it, you know, very, very difficult for anybody to be interested
[Guest]: in Air India.
[Guest]: The other factor, which is also there is that government retains 24% ownership along with
[Guest]: two seats on the board of the future Air India.
[Amit Varma]: Like how many people on that board?
[Guest]: Two, two seats.
[Amit Varma]: But what's the total number of?
[Amit Varma]: No idea.
[Amit Varma]: But that two won't be the majority.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: No, but you know, 24% stake.
[Guest]: So you know, again, the nuisance value remains.
[Guest]: Now, the logic for that is very, very straightforward, you know, nobody wants to get accused of selling
[Guest]: Air India cheap, you know, back in 1999, 2000, when the Vajpayee government sold, you know,
[Guest]: a few companies like Modern Bread and the Centaur Hotel in Juhu, they got accused of
[Guest]: selling those companies really cheap.
[Guest]: So nobody wants to get accused of doing that.
[Guest]: So you know, the government wants to retain some stakes so that if and when Air India
[Guest]: does revive, then they can sell that remaining 24% stake and, you know, get some amount of
[Guest]: money.
[Guest]: Now, the problem is all that is in the future, you know, before that somebody should be interested
[Guest]: in buying the airline and under the current terms and conditions, which include debt,
[Guest]: the employees of Air India, and the government continuing to own, you know, nearly one fourth
[Guest]: of the airline, it seems very difficult as to anyone would buy Air India.
[Guest]: The sad part is that, you know, every year that Air India operates leads to a larger
[Guest]: loss.
[Guest]: So, you know, if you if you look at the numbers, I think between 2010, 11, which is April 2010,
[Guest]: and December 2017, the airline has lost close to 46 47,000 crore rupees.
[Guest]: Now, where is that money coming from?
[Guest]: So every year, the government sort of invests some amount of capital into the airline.
[Guest]: And I think from April 2011, till date, they have invested close to 26,000 crores, which
[Guest]: is obviously not enough to keep the airline going.
[Guest]: So over and above that the airline borrows money.
[Guest]: So they're working capital loans right now are close to 31,000 crores.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Now they're working capital loan of the airline is more than the revenue that the airline
[Guest]: makes in a particular year, I mean, which tells you that there is no business model.
[Guest]: So I mean, if I were to be a little radical and say here that even if someone's willing
[Guest]: to operate Air India for free, the government should just...
[Amit Varma]: I was going to say exactly that, you know, as a taxpayer whose money is going into this
[Amit Varma]: every year, I'd be glad actually, if they gave it away for free, because somebody's
[Guest]: taking the debt of you.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: And you know, and I mean, if they would give it away for free, somebody would take off
[Guest]: almost 48,000 crore of debt away from you, which is not a small amount, which is a huge
[Amit Varma]: amount.
[Amit Varma]: And what's more important is that, you know, people assume that, oh, okay, it's a public
[Amit Varma]: sector company and is there and why should we sell it, we should turn it around, we should
[Amit Varma]: do better management and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But a, as we've discussed in previous episodes, incentives for public sector companies to
[Amit Varma]: do well are just very different, and it simply doesn't happen, they will always be more inefficient
[Amit Varma]: than private sector company.
[Guest]: And that's what you find in this space, if Air India was a private airline, it would
[Guest]: have shut down by now.
[Guest]: And airlines are a very difficult business to be in.
[Guest]: It's not like, you know, airlines shut down all over the world, you know, all the time.
[Guest]: I mean, the last business any government should be is in an airline, because it is a hugely
[Guest]: capital destructive business.
[Guest]: And the government, any government for that matter, not just the Indian government does
[Guest]: not have unlimited amount of money.
[Guest]: And this money can be well utilised somewhere else.
[Amit Varma]: No, and we keep committing the sunk cost fallacy and throwing good money after bad governments
[Amit Varma]: especially tend to do this, saying that we've kept it going for so long, we'll keep it going
[Guest]: a little bit more.
[Guest]: I mean, the other tendency is to sort of look at all these public sector enterprises as
[Guest]: family jewels, you will have all these politicians, you know, saying this, this phrase over and
[Guest]: over again.
[Guest]: Now, the point is, you know, family jewels actually help in an emergency.
[Guest]: So, this is the wrong, you know, term to use, you know, not in case of every public sector
[Amit Varma]: unit, but in case of many public sectors.
[Amit Varma]: Most of them and also jewels are assets, Air India is a liability.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me something, I mean, the sort of people who would call it a family jewel or
[Amit Varma]: use that kind of language would be let's say, classic Nehruvians, right, because Nehru built
[Amit Varma]: this whole public sector and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: But Narendra Modi came in promising different things, it was like, okay, I will do all these
[Amit Varma]: reforms and I will, you know, government should not be in the business of business as a script
[Amit Varma]: writer of his, no doubt, not him himself, eloquently put in his mouth.
[Amit Varma]: But A, they haven't shown any tendency to do any reforms in all these years.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, they're perfectly happy being if there's a big state, as long as they are in charge
[Amit Varma]: of the big state.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, just looking at their record, do you think they were really serious about
[Amit Varma]: selling Air India?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, these terms and conditions, do you think they are just made in bad faith?
[Amit Varma]: They know that no one will agree to them?
[Guest]: That's a difficult question to answer, because, you know, only people who have come up with
[Guest]: these terms and conditions would know whether they have been made in good faith or bad faith.
[Guest]: But the point is, you know, in fact, the interesting bit recently was that Mohan Bhagwat, you know,
[Guest]: the man who is in charge of the boss man of RSS, if I may put it so, recently said that
[Guest]: Air India should be sold to an Indian airline.
[Guest]: I mean, I'm paraphrasing here.
[Guest]: The interesting thing is, what that tells us is he's at least fine with the idea of
[Guest]: the government selling the airline, which wasn't the case in the past, because, you
[Guest]: know, anything that the BJP does, they need the, you know, clearance from the RSS.
[Guest]: So he's, you know, he's probably ready to meet the government halfway there.
[Guest]: But the problem is, the terms that have been set, I mean, no Indian airline in their right
[Guest]: mind would be able to, you know, buy Air India right now, and I mean, they're not big enough.
[Guest]: So the solution to this is, and if, you know, the government, I mean, I've read some media
[Guest]: reports which have said that the government is looking into it, and if they are serious
[Guest]: about it, the only way to sell Air India is to sort of divide it and sell it.
[Guest]: So what do I mean by that?
[Guest]: So look at an airline like Indigo, now they are clearly not interested in the domestic
[Guest]: business of Air India, because they already have 40% of the Indian market, domestic market.
[Guest]: What would they be interested in?
[Guest]: They would be interested in the international market.
[Guest]: What part of the international market would they be interested in?
[Guest]: Probably the Gulf, the Middle East market, because Air India Express has a reasonably
[Guest]: good presence in that market.
[Guest]: And Indigo being a low cost airline, I mean, so you know, you would have that sort of synergy,
[Guest]: you know, which the merger experts talk about all the time.
[Guest]: So that part is very, very clear.
[Guest]: Even an airline like Jet, which is not doing too well internationally, would be interested
[Guest]: in the international business of Air India.
[Guest]: Look at Tata's.
[Guest]: Now Tata's essentially have stakes in two airlines operating domestic market in India,
[Guest]: that is Air Asia, and there is Vistara.
[Guest]: If you add the amount of the market that they have is around 8%.
[Guest]: So they would clearly be interested in the domestic business of Air India.
[Guest]: But would they be interested in the domestic business of Air India along with the employees
[Guest]: of Air India?
[Guest]: I'm really not so sure.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, so you have to essentially sell this business piece by piece.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, that's easier said than done.
[Guest]: And the government is the last institution which would have the capability of selling
[Amit Varma]: anything piece by piece.
[Amit Varma]: No, the thing with piece by piece, even there is a problem that arises is that, yeah, their
[Amit Varma]: international landing rights and all that are very valuable, their fleet is valuable,
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth, different chunks of the business are valuable.
[Amit Varma]: But what is a huge burden is that debt is a huge burden, their extremely inefficient
[Amit Varma]: employee base is a huge burden, by which I don't mean the individuals are inefficient.
[Amit Varma]: I just mean that the system as a whole is inefficient, even if the individuals are excellent
[Amit Varma]: professionals at what they do, no one is disputing that.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you do about these?
[Amit Varma]: How do you separate them?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the government, for example, can't just say that we'll keep the debt and sell
[Guest]: the company.
[Guest]: Which is, you know, as far as employees are concerned, I mean, you know, unless the government
[Guest]: I mean, makes them the sacrificial lamb for the lack of a better term, nobody is going
[Unknown]: to buy the airline.
[Guest]: I mean, it's very clear.
[Guest]: You have any airline which buys airline should be allowed to fire people from day one.
[Guest]: Otherwise, you know, because airlines are a very difficult business to run.
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, the basic truth of economics is that as a company, you get money if you're
[Amit Varma]: of service to the consumer.
[Amit Varma]: And as an employee, you get money if you're of service to the company, right?
[Guest]: So and that's a company's call to make the debt, you know, so it's the debt part is the
[Guest]: most difficult part, because that takes away, you know, almost all servicing that debt takes
[Guest]: away a large chunk of their revenue.
[Guest]: So unless you know, the government takes over that debt, and then tries to sell the airline.
[Guest]: Only then I think people will get interested because I don't see any airline taking on
[Guest]: $5 billion of debt and servicing it in the years to come.
[Amit Varma]: So are there any sort of previous cases of any government in the world actually selling
[Amit Varma]: a public sector unit of with this kind of debt?
[Guest]: And is there any model?
[Guest]: I really don't know.
[Guest]: But what I do know is that, you know, the British government did sell the British Airways,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Guest]: And the airline did fairly well now, but whether the British Airways had debt at that point
[Guest]: of time, or how much debt did they have, I have no idea.
[Amit Varma]: So if Mr. Jaitley listens to this podcast, and he calls you into his office in New Delhi
[Amit Varma]: and says, Vivek, you handle Air India, what would your inclinations be?
[Guest]: I mean, see, the only way you can sell the airline is, obviously, as I said, you know,
[Guest]: the government will have to take on the debt in some form.
[Guest]: And or, you know, if not, you know, if, see, the thing is this, if you look at two thirds
[Guest]: of the debt of the airline, they're basically working capital loans.
[Guest]: Now, if anyone's taking over two thirds of the debt, I mean, they need to get something
[Unknown]: against it, right?
[Amit Varma]: There is nothing against it, right?
[Guest]: So what do you do in that case?
[Guest]: So, you know, if you do not take on the entire debt, you at least sort of bring it down,
[Guest]: I mean, you know, let's say, you know, you say, okay, one third of the debt, maybe someone
[Guest]: might get interested.
[Guest]: So at one third of the debt, you know, the amount comes to around 17,000 crores.
[Guest]: And the aircraft loans of the airline Air India are around 18,000 crores.
[Guest]: So against, you at least have an asset against those loans.
[Guest]: So at some level, that makes sense.
[Guest]: I mean, you probably bring down, you know, the two third part to one third, and the employees,
[Guest]: I mean, you cannot negotiate on their behalf, you have to let the new owner decide, you
[Guest]: know, what they want to do, because ultimately, Air India has around, I think 18, 19,000 employees.
[Guest]: And in the context, larger context of the nation, it shouldn't matter.
[Guest]: And most of them, you know, if they're good enough, should be because if they're providing
[Guest]: value, they'll get a job because see, the point is, again, you know, what we don't realize
[Guest]: is that only 3% of Indians have traveled by air.
[Guest]: So there is the market is still, it's not even opened up.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And anyone who's providing value will keep his job or get a new job.
[Amit Varma]: It's not a big deal.
[Guest]: Only the only people who would complain are those who know they are not providing value
[Guest]: and are basically sponging off our money, taxpayers money, which is true.
[Guest]: So there are no perfect solutions going around here, right?
[Amit Varma]: It's not I mean, economics is not mathematics, but moving aside from Air India, which is
[Amit Varma]: a slightly almost an intractable problem because of the size of the debt and so on, in general,
[Amit Varma]: just as regards this government's approach or ideology towards public sector units and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, towards the business of being in business, so to say, to paraphrase those famous
[Amit Varma]: words, what have you seen?
[Amit Varma]: Has there been a change?
[Guest]: Or is it more?
[Guest]: Not at all.
[Guest]: It's it's almost in fact, the economics of Narendra Modi is almost similar to the economics
[Guest]: of Congress.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly what I keep saying.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, he has a command and control mindset of Nehru and authoritarianism of and her appetite
[Amit Varma]: for disastrous experiments.
[Amit Varma]: Thinking of disastrous experiments, obviously brought demonetization to mind immediately.
[Amit Varma]: But let's leave that aside for a moment.
[Amit Varma]: And instead, talk about something a phenomenon that came up recently, and that happened a
[Amit Varma]: lot after demonetization, it was natural then I'm not sure it's natural now, which is cash
[Amit Varma]: shortages in the banks.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you've written about this as well, in some detail explaining why there were these
[Amit Varma]: recent cash shortages and people lining up outside ATMs and those signs on ATMs that
[Amit Varma]: cash not available.
[Amit Varma]: What happened?
[Guest]: What went wrong now?
[Guest]: Okay, so I think, you know, this is a situation where you can only have a theory.
[Guest]: Okay, so this is my theory.
[Guest]: And my theory is that, you know, as the economy expands, the currency in circulation also
[Guest]: goes up.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Now, if you look at the numbers, and if you look at numbers between 2012, 2014, and 2014
[Guest]: and 2016, the economy in both the cases grew by more than 20%.
[Guest]: And here we are not adjusting for inflation.
[Guest]: So this is what we call nominal GDP growth.
[Guest]: At the same time, the currency in circulation also grew by more than 20%.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: I mean, it's not a one to one, more or less, more or less, there abouts.
[Guest]: Now come down to the two years between 2016 and 2018.
[Guest]: The economy again grew by around 21%.
[Guest]: But the currency in circulation grew by only 10%.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So obviously, there was a certain shortage, which was already there.
[Guest]: Now, typically, if you look at the post demonetization, pre demonetization, and the post demonetization,
[Guest]: you know, cash to currency to GDP ratios, there is a substantial difference.
[Guest]: Now pre demonetization, the ratio was around 12%.
[Guest]: As of March 31, 2017, it came down to 8.8%.
[Guest]: And as of March 31, 2018, it had recovered to around 10.9%.
[Guest]: So we are still that one, 1.1% short.
[Guest]: Now, since around November, December, since October, the economy has started reviving.
[Guest]: You know, when the economy starts to revive, obviously, the cash demand goes up.
[Guest]: And that cash is not available in the market.
[Guest]: What also happened was that, you know, around three to four months back, all these rumors
[Guest]: around the FRDI bill and the government seizing money in banks started to go around.
[Guest]: So people started hoarding cash, people started hoarding cash.
[Guest]: And this is I mean, again, all this is anecdotal.
[Guest]: And I mean, there's some data as well.
[Guest]: In fact, if you look at so you know, if you compare the cash withdrawn from ATMs using
[Guest]: debit cards during the second half of the year, vis-a-vis the first half of the year,
[Guest]: so you know, the second half of 2017-18, the growth was 12.2%.
[Guest]: And if you look at the data for the last six years, this has been the highest growth.
[Guest]: Now, typically, people do withdraw more money during the second half of the year because
[Guest]: we have festivals and at the same time the the agriculture, you know, the procurement
[Guest]: season is also, you know, runs parallelly.
[Guest]: But this increase was more than, you know, justifiable.
[Guest]: So at some level, my theory is that people obviously, you know, got spooked out with
[Guest]: all these FRDI rumors going around and started to hoard cash.
[Guest]: You know, what happens is, you know, it is easy to hoard cash using the 2000 rupee note.
[Guest]: And as the 2000 rupee note disappears from the market, you need four 500 rupee notes
[Guest]: to replace it.
[Guest]: So the currency has not been expanding at the same speed as the demand is, okay.
[Guest]: So if you put all these factors together, you know, ultimately, the reason there was
[Guest]: a cash shortage was because of demonetization.
[Guest]: If demonetization had not happened, and the cash or the currency had, you know, continued
[Guest]: to grow at the same pace as it had in the past, this would have never happened.
[Amit Varma]: And that took away 86% of the money supply, so to say.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing there is a mistake, I mean, we've discussed this before many times, and
[Amit Varma]: the mistake that the Modi government, one of the many mistakes they made there was they
[Amit Varma]: assumed that 500 and 1000 rupee notes are used for storing money as opposed to transacting.
[Guest]: No, I mean, so yes, I mean, which is which was absolutely not the case.
[Guest]: Yes, because cash is not, I mean, as I think said earlier as well.
[Guest]: And there was enough data, which told them that people don't hold black money in the
[Amit Varma]: form of cash.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: So people hold, there are ways of doing it.
[Amit Varma]: And those who are inclined to hold small amounts of it in cash now find it easier because of
[Amit Varma]: the 2000 rupee notes, which as you correctly said, take 4-500 rupee notes to, you know,
[Guest]: get you tougher.
[Guest]: And therefore, because we don't have a 1000 rupee note, and we have a 200 rupee note.
[Amit Varma]: And when elections happen, then obviously parties are holding money and they're, you
[Guest]: know, they're gathering.
[Guest]: So all that essentially adds to so you know, if you if you look at obviously, there is
[Guest]: election only happening in the state of Karnataka.
[Guest]: And it's not like elections haven't happened before, but there was no cash shortage earlier.
[Guest]: But this time around, there is a cash shortage, because earlier there was enough money floating
[Guest]: around in the system.
[Guest]: And that money is no longer floating around, I mean, because you know, your currency to
[Guest]: GDP ratio has gone down.
[Guest]: So every, you know, sort of this incremental use of cash, pulled away money from an already
[Guest]: cash starved financial system.
[Amit Varma]: And that ultimately led to a cash shortage.
[Amit Varma]: So now, you know, we had an episode discussing your easy money trilogy, and the whole concept
[Amit Varma]: of easy money and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So like looking back on the last four years, and looking back on all the governments before
[Amit Varma]: that, what do you think is this government's approach to monetary policy?
[Amit Varma]: And is it different from what previous governments used to be?
[Amit Varma]: Is it more of the same?
[Amit Varma]: Do they not have a clue?
[Guest]: I mean, how would you how would you sum it up?
[Guest]: Normally, I mean, any government which sort of demonetizes currency wouldn't really I
[Guest]: would say they wouldn't have any understanding of any monetary policy and demonetizing 86%
[Amit Varma]: is madness.
[Unknown]: It's madness.
[Guest]: I mean, so I don't think there is any understanding of I mean, forget understanding, I don't think
[Amit Varma]: they're bothered.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, defenders of the move.
[Guest]: And this can hardly be defended, but in the sense, you know, the new the main defense
[Guest]: is that it has led to, you know, income tax being paid going up.
[Guest]: And you know, if you look at the numbers, the difference is not huge in the sense.
[Guest]: Last year, I think the direct access to GDP ratio was 5.6%.
[Guest]: This year, it's 5.92%.
[Guest]: So it's 32 basis points.
[Guest]: Also, you need to take into account the fact that, you know, the refunds this year have
[Guest]: been much lower than past years.
[Guest]: So if you don't refund money, obviously, or, you know, direct tax to GDP ratio goes up.
[Guest]: Then there are other things wherein, you know, there were news reports about how banks were
[Guest]: forced to deposit the TDS that they collected in the month of March, in the month of March
[Guest]: itself.
[Guest]: You know, in earlier years, it used to be in the month of April.
[Guest]: Also the larger point is that, you know, there has people say that there has been a growth
[Guest]: in the number of taxpayers, which isn't exactly true.
[Guest]: There has been a growth in the number of people filing tax returns, which are two different
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: So, which basically means that it's chartered accountants who are benefiting at the end
[Guest]: of the day.
[Guest]: So, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: Ache din for somebody.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, you can say that.
[Amit Varma]: So,
[Amit Varma]: No, but what I meant that there are differences, I meant that the one common defense of Modi
[Amit Varma]: or not Modi, but his government, so to say, is that, listen, he took this decision unilaterally.
[Amit Varma]: Even Jaitley wasn't consulted, those guys didn't have a clue of what was happening.
[Amit Varma]: It's one madman.
[Amit Varma]: But then the larger question is that even if you look at, say, the finance ministry's
[Amit Varma]: management over the last four years, or so on, what's, what's your take on it?
[Amit Varma]: What's your assessment of how the finance ministry and the finance?
[Guest]: I mean, they're just, you know, they're essentially obsessed with the optics of driving up the
[Guest]: direct tax numbers now, right?
[Guest]: With the optics of right.
[Guest]: And I mean, you cannot ultimately explain what you mean by the optics.
[Guest]: I mean, basically, you know, at every occasion, you're essentially trying to justify that,
[Guest]: you know, we are collecting more tax than the past.
[Guest]: Yeah, obviously, you will collect more tax than the past, because as the economy grows,
[Guest]: the tax collected also grows.
[Guest]: Now, how do you, you know, you basically, when you claim that you're collecting more
[Guest]: tax than the past, the first thing you need to do is give out numbers as a proportion
[Guest]: of GDP, not, then you need to sort of give a breakup of the kind of taxes you're collecting,
[Guest]: because you know, 2017-18 has been a good year for the stock markets as well.
[Guest]: So, you know, they would have collected, you know, more securities transaction tax, more
[Guest]: short term capital gains tax.
[Guest]: So which is if you look at the data for between 2005 and 2008, there was a spike in the direct
[Guest]: tax to GDP ratio, and then it fell again.
[Guest]: And why was there a spike?
[Guest]: Because the stock markets were doing well, the real estate market was doing well.
[Guest]: Now, I mean, this year, obviously, the real estate market is not doing well.
[Guest]: But a lot of people have been booking stock market gains.
[Guest]: So when my point is that, you know, there are other ways of sort of improving the tax
[Guest]: to GDP ratio, like simplifying the tax system, which is not happened, you know, like, like,
[Amit Varma]: somebody once told me that one way of seeing how well the economy is doing or how much
[Amit Varma]: you're progressing is by seeing how much tax revenues are going up.
[Amit Varma]: And for me, that's, you know, the more taxes go up, the worse I feel, because that's, that's
[Amit Varma]: a transfer of wealth from the productive part of the economy to the unproductive part of
[Guest]: the economy.
[Guest]: Which is true.
[Guest]: Also, you know, if you look at again, I mean, okay, you know, let's assume, I mean, I mean,
[Guest]: that's obviously what a government would aim for.
[Guest]: So, you know, let's keep all these, you know, points of view aside, and let's assume that
[Guest]: the government is collecting more tax in a year when the economic growth has actually
[Guest]: come down.
[Guest]: So, I mean, there is a disconnect somewhere.
[Guest]: Now, you're collecting more direct taxes, but your indirect taxes have fallen, I mean,
[Guest]: the GST, the amount of money they expected to collect, it's nowhere near that, I mean,
[Guest]: they expected to collect some 91,000 crore rupees a month, the collections are around
[Guest]: 83, 84, 85, the central government expects to collect around 50,000 crores of central
[Guest]: GST every month.
[Guest]: If you look at the assumptions for, you know, the current year's budget, in the month of
[Guest]: March, which was obviously February data, they had collected around 27,000 crores.
[Guest]: So, there is a huge, where is that 23,000 crores going to come from?
[Guest]: So, as I said, you know, this government is essentially obsessed with the optics of trying
[Guest]: to portray that, you know, we are collecting more tax.
[Guest]: This governance by WhatsApp.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, you could say that.
[Amit Varma]: So let's, let's, I think we might be getting lost in the weeds here.
[Amit Varma]: So let's, let's take a sort of a more, a broader look at the economy as such.
[Amit Varma]: And so the question I'm going to kind of ask is that look, for you and I, it's very easy
[Amit Varma]: to say how our lives are as broadly we are living very comfortable lives.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, we have to file GST a little bit more and blah, blah, blah, but minor inconveniences.
[Amit Varma]: Basically, you know, like my earlier analogy of you ask someone who's sitting in an air
[Amit Varma]: conditioned car the weather and he'll say it's cool.
[Amit Varma]: That's pretty much how it is with the economy and you and me.
[Amit Varma]: But if you are to try and get a sense of what the economy really is like, and for a moment,
[Amit Varma]: let's leave politics out of it.
[Amit Varma]: We know that in some ways, things are decent, we are growing at a decent pace.
[Amit Varma]: On the other hand, there are many big things to worry about none more worrying basically
[Amit Varma]: than the jobs crisis that is coming up.
[Amit Varma]: So if you were to evaluate our economy and the direction we are moving in, what are the
[Amit Varma]: sort of metrics or the factors you'd look at?
[Amit Varma]: What are the things you'd look at and what would you conclude?
[Guest]: So the first thing is, I mean, I would obviously look at the jobs scenario.
[Guest]: And the sad part is, we really don't have much data coming out on this front.
[Amit Varma]: And can you explain why we don't have?
[Amit Varma]: I can tell you.
[Guest]: So one is, you know, we used to have this annual employment unemployment report, which
[Guest]: the Labour Bureau used to bring out.
[Guest]: Now, the last report came out in 2015-16.
[Guest]: And recently, the government answered in Parliament, they said that they've scrapped, you know,
[Guest]: the surveys, which sort of, you know, on which those reports were based.
[Guest]: In fact, they also said that a sixth survey was carried out, but that report has, it hasn't
[Guest]: seen the light of day.
[Guest]: So, I don't know, probably the Niti Aayog is developing some sort of a measure.
[Guest]: So we'll have to wait for that.
[Guest]: But having said that, there is enough anecdotal evidence, which tells you that an anecdotal
[Guest]: data based, it's not like, you know, me talking to five guys.
[Guest]: So that tells you that there are not enough formal jobs going around.
[Guest]: So recently, I mean, if you've been following the newspapers, or you would know that the
[Guest]: Indian Railways had advertised for 90,000 vacancies, against which it got 2.8 crore
[Guest]: applications.
[Guest]: So I did some rough calculations, and I came to the conclusion that nearly one fourth of
[Guest]: India's youth workforce, which is looking for a job, I mean, not everyone is, which
[Guest]: is looking for a job, basically applied for these railway jobs.
[Guest]: And this is without getting the education factor, you know, in as a cut off, you know,
[Guest]: if you get in the education factor, also, the one fifth portion will go up even more.
[Guest]: So even, you know, so, and this is not really outlier data, we've been hearing these kinds
[Guest]: of numbers for years.
[Guest]: So you can, so basically, 20% of India's youth workforce looking for a job applies for 90,000
[Guest]: vacancies in Indian Railways.
[Guest]: I mean, if this is not disturbing, I don't know what is.
[Guest]: So the explanation people normally offer against this is, you know, everybody wants a government
[Guest]: job in India, which is true.
[Guest]: But that is not the complete explanation.
[Guest]: Now you need to dig a little more to understand as to why everyone wants a government job
[Guest]: in India.
[Guest]: If you look at, you know, in India, we have this term called underemployment, which basically
[Guest]: means that everyone looking for a job for all through the year is not able to find one.
[Guest]: So if you look at the underemployment data, 60% of the Indians who are looking for a job
[Guest]: all through the year, are able to find it, which basically means 40% of the Indians who
[Guest]: are looking for a job all through the year are not able to find it.
[Guest]: So the informal economy does not give you work all the time, okay.
[Guest]: So if you are a part of the informal economy and a government job comes up somewhere, I
[Guest]: mean, you are going to apply for it.
[Guest]: That's the first part.
[Guest]: The second part is that if you look at the kind of money that gets paid, you know, if
[Guest]: you look at self-employed professionals, two thirds of self-employed professionals and
[Guest]: contract workers make up to Rs 90,000 a year, which is basically Rs 7,500 a month, okay.
[Guest]: Even the most basic government job pays around Rs 20,000 a month, okay, at the lowest level.
[Guest]: So it is obvious people, even people who have jobs, these so-called informal jobs will apply
[Amit Varma]: for government jobs.
[Amit Varma]: If I may interject, another factor is, and I think this is a difference that Jagdish
[Amit Varma]: Bhagwati had once brought up between India and China, for example, and it was possibly
[Amit Varma]: based on his reading of Ronald Coase's book on China, where the idea was that India is
[Amit Varma]: a rent seeking economy, while China is a profit seeking economy, where the sort of the natural
[Amit Varma]: instinct in China is, if you want to make money, you provide a service to someone, you
[Amit Varma]: make their lives better, you get money for it, you're trying to make a profit that way
[Amit Varma]: by helping, you know, it's a positive sum game.
[Amit Varma]: While in India, the government is so all powerful, and not just all powerful, but so pervasive,
[Amit Varma]: that the easiest way to make money in India is not through the struggles that are involved
[Amit Varma]: with starting a private business or working in the private sector.
[Amit Varma]: But if you get a government job, then you know that you can basically sponge off the
[Guest]: rest of the people.
[Guest]: But then see, I mean, that has always been the case.
[Guest]: My point is slightly different in what I'm what I'm basically trying to say is that, you know, just
[Guest]: because someone has a job or is doing some work, I mean, you cannot say that he cannot
[Guest]: aspire to sort of, you know, be at a better level, which a government job promises him.
[Guest]: So even if, you know, let's say, you know, for the sake of argument, an honest man gets
[Guest]: into working for the government, I mean, he will make much more money than he is making
[Guest]: in the private sector.
[Guest]: So that is a fact of life.
[Guest]: So you know, the Niti Aayog had done, you know, had given some data and they said, basically
[Guest]: said that India's jobs problem is not an informal jobs problem, but it is a formal jobs problem.
[Guest]: Because you know, the the ratio of incomes can even be up, you know, 20 is to 1.
[Guest]: So ultimately, you know, people want government jobs, especially at the lower level, because
[Guest]: the government jobs pay much better.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm not even talking about and the reason for that is also in a sense of failure of
[Amit Varma]: government.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the reason there isn't a vibrant job sector, there isn't a, you know, is because
[Amit Varma]: we haven't allowed, for example, the manufacturing revolution, which China went through because
[Amit Varma]: of the cheap labor, which could have, you know, taken us places and it hasn't and that
[Amit Varma]: was never allowed to happen.
[Guest]: And private enterprises never allowed to progress was never so, which is why, you know, anyone
[Guest]: and everyone who sort of is, wants to move up in life, wants a government job.
[Guest]: So it's not as simple as you know, people have, you know, people applying for government
[Guest]: jobs, because they can make, you know, more money on the side or because the life is comfortable.
[Guest]: I mean, yes, all that is there, but there is much more to it than that.
[Guest]: So there was this railways thing that happened and then there was something I think Mumbai
[Guest]: Mirror had a front page story recently where they said that 2 lakh people have applied
[Guest]: for 1137 posts for constables in Mumbai police.
[Guest]: And very, very interestingly, it had as usual got, you know, people who are MBAs and engineers
[Guest]: and in fact, there were three lawyers also currently and one PhD.
[Amit Varma]: So now why are these people?
[Amit Varma]: I'm surprised there was just one PhD.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, there should have been more.
[Guest]: So, so, you know, the question is, why are these people applying for these jobs?
[Guest]: I mean, the reason is very straightforward, because at lower levels, the government pays
[Guest]: much better.
[Guest]: And obviously, you know, in case of, you know, constable, there are other avenues of making
[Amit Varma]: money as well.
[Amit Varma]: So there are a lot of these, I mean, what it also points to, and this is an aside not
[Amit Varma]: really related to this, but what it also points to when you have so many PhDs and MBAs applying
[Amit Varma]: for, you know, clinical level jobs, is that our education system is badly broken that
[Guest]: most of these degrees have become completely useless.
[Guest]: In fact, what has also happened is, I mean, I can, because I remember some numbers for
[Guest]: engineering very clearly, India produces more engineers than China and USA put together.
[Guest]: So obviously, we are over educating people in some sense.
[Guest]: So what has happened is, if you look at many engineering colleges across Western and South
[Guest]: Southern India, where, you know, you have all many more private engineering colleges
[Guest]: than other parts of India.
[Guest]: Many engineering colleges are shutting down, I mean, they don't get students anymore.
[Guest]: In fact, in some states like Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu and Karnataka, as long as you sit
[Guest]: for the exam, you're likely to get an engineering seat.
[Amit Varma]: And I suppose the demand has gone down because people have figured that it's no longer meaningful
[Guest]: unless you're getting it from a good institution.
[Guest]: Yes, which is, it took them at least 25 years to figure that out.
[Guest]: But I mean, this was something that I used to say, you know, back in 2002 and 2003, that,
[Guest]: you know, all these engineering degrees are not worth it.
[Guest]: But then, you know, people take some time to figure out the most basic things in life.
[Guest]: So see, it was all a function of the fact that, you know, in the 90s, very average engineers
[Guest]: suddenly found jobs in, you know, IT companies and, and the Y2K thing happened and, you know,
[Guest]: suddenly you had all these guys working on site in the US and making dollars.
[Guest]: And so all that glamour caught on.
[Guest]: So everybody wanted to be an engineer and work in an IT company.
[Guest]: But then that business model doesn't work anymore.
[Guest]: I mean, IT salaries, starting salaries haven't gone up in years.
[Guest]: In fact, an Uber driver, if you, you know, if you were to sort of drive an Uber for 12
[Guest]: hours a day, you would end up making more money than an entry level IT engineer.
[Amit Varma]: And much, much more than a podcaster.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, the next time you take a taxi after your recording, who knows who might
[Amit Varma]: be driving it?
[Amit Varma]: Like, Hello, Vivek, good to see you again.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, the job stalled was a consequence of a system of governance that is completely
[Amit Varma]: broken the whole command and control mindset, private sector wasn't allowed to come up,
[Amit Varma]: private enterprise was looked down upon, you have your license.
[Unknown]: It still is.
[Amit Varma]: It's like that.
[Amit Varma]: Now, it's worsened by what people call the demographic dividend, but could also equally
[Amit Varma]: be called a demographic disaster because you have, you know, a million people coming into
[Amit Varma]: the workforce every month, and you just don't have those jobs, formal jobs, you don't have
[Guest]: those formal jobs.
[Guest]: And it's informally, you know, everyone can open a pakora stalls.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, pakora stalls are very important.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, so yeah, I mean, one thing that I often wonder is why aren't there riots on
[Amit Varma]: the street already?
[Amit Varma]: And how long will it take for them to be there?
[Amit Varma]: But you know, just leaving that amusing aside, at a policy level, what could have been done
[Amit Varma]: about this?
[Amit Varma]: Like, let's say in 2014, you're called in by Mr. Modi, and he says that I've been listening
[Amit Varma]: to your podcast.
[Amit Varma]: So you haven't recorded them yet.
[Amit Varma]: But I've got them through a time machine.
[Amit Varma]: And you are very insightful and you know, I will go on to make many mistakes unless
[Amit Varma]: I make you finance minister and do something at a policy level, what could have been done,
[Amit Varma]: what can still be done?
[Amit Varma]: And what you know, I mean, I wrote a big book about that.
[Guest]: India's big government and how it's hurting us, which I would encourage our listeners
[Guest]: to read that because it's not such a straightforward question to answer.
[Guest]: But you know, at the most basic level, you have to let businesses operate, right?
[Guest]: I mean, you have to let them, allow them to expand without having to sort of pay rent,
[Guest]: you know, every time they want to sort of, you know, go beyond what they are currently
[Amit Varma]: doing.
[Amit Varma]: So tell my listeners that you know, we keep like apologies if you're not, if you're wondering
[Amit Varma]: what the phrase rent and rent seeking are, we're not talking about the rent you pay when
[Amit Varma]: you say rent some real estate or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But what we mean by rent is a term economists use.
[Amit Varma]: So basically, when a government servant has a certain amount of power, he uses that power
[Amit Varma]: to extract what economists call rent.
[Amit Varma]: So for example, if there is a food licensing inspector, who has to inspect your restaurant
[Amit Varma]: every month, he extracts rent by coming to your restaurant and saying that I will report
[Amit Varma]: you unless you give me so much money, that is a rent.
[Amit Varma]: And all these rents become an additional burden upon the business and make it harder for it
[Amit Varma]: to operate and at the margins, turn profitable businesses into unprofitable businesses, and
[Amit Varma]: make it more profitable, in fact, for an enterprising individual to be the government servant who
[Amit Varma]: is actually getting rent, rather than try to be an entrepreneur fighting against this
[Amit Varma]: wave.
[Amit Varma]: I had an episode on the scene unseen many, a few months ago with my very good friend
[Amit Varma]: Madhu Menon, which was on restaurant regulations, you know, he used to run a restaurant and
[Amit Varma]: he sort of enlightened me on what it used to involve, and he no longer runs a restaurant
[Amit Varma]: and I'm really happy for him.
[Amit Varma]: Because in India, to be a private entrepreneur of any sort is just, you know, a path full
[Guest]: of thorns.
[Guest]: And, you know, a bigger example for this would be a bureaucrat sending his son abroad for
[Guest]: studies and a businessman paying for it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this is fairly classic, which happens indirectly anyway, but it can also happen
[Guest]: directly.
[Guest]: It happens.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So okay, so that's one thing.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, make it easier for private enterprise to come in and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll give you a very recent example.
[Guest]: So yesterday, the Business Standard had a very interesting report on trade unions.
[Guest]: Now, in India, you can become a member of, you know, let's say there is a company and
[Guest]: a trade union is being formed.
[Guest]: Now, you don't need to be a worker in that company, or you don't need an, you know, having
[Guest]: spent an X number of years in that sector, to become a member of that trade union, okay,
[Guest]: we operate along those lines.
[Guest]: So what it does is it has led to the creation of, I mean, what is the right phrase for it?
[Guest]: Creation of, I mean, carder is not the right word, but basically, there are many people
[Guest]: going around who are professional trade unionists, right?
[Guest]: Now, this is not done.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, only if a worker is working in a particular sector, or has worked in X
[Guest]: number of years in a particular sector, or is working in that company where the trade
[Guest]: union is being formed, you should be allowed to become a member of the trade union or run
[Guest]: it for that matter.
[Guest]: Now, so the government had some plans of changing rules around this.
[Guest]: But those plans have now been dropped because the trade unions objected to it.
[Guest]: So you know, it starts at these, you know, granular level regulations, which sort of need
[Guest]: to be simplified and done away with, or something as simple as, you know, if let's say, an entrepreneur
[Guest]: is looking to increase his authorized capital, I mean, the, you know, in even in that case,
[Guest]: there is a certain amount of money that needs to be paid to the government.
[Guest]: I mean, these are things which need to be done away with, I mean, it just doesn't make
[Guest]: any sense, or for the fact that, you know, how these tax inspectors hound smaller entrepreneurs
[Guest]: for bribes.
[Amit Varma]: And so, you know, one of the things the Modi government promised it would do in 2014, and
[Amit Varma]: they've been working hard on the optics of this is ease of doing business.
[Amit Varma]: Do you think there's been a difference?
[Guest]: I mean, this is a question you will have to put to a businessman.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you'll get different answers from different businessmen.
[Guest]: I can only talk anecdotally, and I mean, I don't think there has really been much of
[Guest]: an improvement.
[Guest]: I mean, even though we've gone up the rankings, but the rankings again, as you would know,
[Guest]: are limited largely, I mean, they're limited to Mumbai and Delhi.
[Amit Varma]: So as far as the jobs, coming jobs crisis, ongoing jobs crisis,
[Guest]: Oh, so there's another point that I wanted to make about the jobs crisis, which I forgot.
[Guest]: So the Center for Monitoring Indian Economy recently put out some data, which essentially
[Guest]: showed that the, you know, the total value of projects scrapped by companies in the year
[Guest]: 2017-18 was the highest ever.
[Guest]: And it went up by almost 60% between 16-17 and 17-18.
[Amit Varma]: What does it indicate?
[Amit Varma]: What is it?
[Guest]: What it essentially indicates is that, you know, if a project is not completed, and it
[Guest]: is scrapped before being completed, you know, it does not create the jobs that it would
[Guest]: have otherwise done.
[Guest]: So even if you if you look at the projects which have been completed during the course
[Guest]: of 17-18, the value has dropped by almost a third.
[Guest]: So again, so if you take these factors into account, I mean, formal jobs,
[Amit Varma]: But I'm not saying what will it cause, I'm saying, what has caused it?
[Guest]: That's very, I mean, it could be anything from, I mean, from capacity utilization to
[Amit Varma]: whatever.
[Amit Varma]: So broadly, if you had to, you know, and you write about the economy every week, it's pretty
[Amit Varma]: much what you do, and you've been doing it, you know, for a long time, from well before
[Amit Varma]: Modi came to power and in the last four years and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And if you sort of had to give a report card to this government based not on a utopian
[Amit Varma]: vision of Oh, this is what should be done, but based in purely practical terms and give
[Amit Varma]: a report card, how much have they tried?
[Amit Varma]: What difference have they made?
[Amit Varma]: What are the sort of parameters you would mark them on and what kind of marks would
[Amit Varma]: you give?
[Guest]: You basically want me to do a list like broadly, I mean, hold you to it.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not going to like, you know, there's there's no way to screenshot this and put it on Twitter
[Guest]: six months later and said, look, he said this, I know, I'm not very good at these, you know,
[Amit Varma]: six things you need to do to turn India around.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this sounds like that, you know, all these listicles that forget the numbers, forget
[Amit Varma]: the numbers, forget the parameters, just in general, that, you know, both of us understand
[Amit Varma]: that the system has been bad for a long time, and that it would remain bad is not a surprise
[Amit Varma]: partly because of the inertia of the system and partly because of the demographic disaster
[Amit Varma]: as it were of so many young people coming into the workforce.
[Amit Varma]: That is not a surprise.
[Amit Varma]: But would you say that the Modi government, if you were to just answer the simple question
[Amit Varma]: about whether, you know, what kind of a job have they done to fix these problems, would
[Guest]: it be a little or a lot?
[Guest]: So, you know, let's talk in a, I mean, let's talk in the context of public sector banks,
[Guest]: which I think is by far the biggest problem they face.
[Guest]: In the public eye, certainly.
[Guest]: It's coming to the public eye now, after Nirav Modi sort of defaulted on the loans and went
[Guest]: away.
[Guest]: So, let's talk in terms of that.
[Guest]: And you know, I mean, it's not like, you know, so the first thing people, when you start
[Guest]: talking about bad loans, first thing people sort of jump up and say, but, you know, Modi
[Guest]: did not cause these bad loans, fair enough, he did not.
[Guest]: But then, you know, he did become the Prime Minister and as the Prime Minister, it was
[Guest]: his responsibility to solve it.
[Guest]: I mean, it might have been created, or it was created by the previous regime, but that
[Guest]: does not mean anything anymore now.
[Guest]: Now, if you look at the bad loans, they have been rising and as of 31st December, they
[Guest]: touched a total of 9 lakh crore, which is a huge number, 9 lakh crore on a whole, public
[Guest]: sector banks, the bad loans are around 7 lakh 77,000 78,000 crores.
[Guest]: Now, what has been done to sort of solve this problem?
[Guest]: I mean, nothing really, I mean, the government continues to pump money into these banks.
[Guest]: You have the bankruptcy code, which has been implemented, there are too many teething troubles,
[Guest]: you know, that it's going through.
[Guest]: But at a more, you know, broadly at, I mean, very, very practical level, you know, as we've
[Guest]: also we've talked about in the past, you know, should the government be running 21 public
[Guest]: sector banks?
[Guest]: I mean, it is bizarre, nowhere in the world does the government run 21.
[Amit Varma]: And I should interject here and inform our listeners that we have an episode on public
[Amit Varma]: sector banks where we did speak about exactly this.
[Guest]: So you know, so you need to start looking into the fact that, okay, this has happened.
[Guest]: Now, how do we prevent this from happening again in the future?
[Guest]: I mean, nobody's really thinking through that.
[Guest]: All that has happened is that the government has continued to throw money at the problem.
[Guest]: Now, throwing money at the problem, our money at the problem, is not going to solve it in
[Guest]: any way.
[Guest]: Now, one of the things that I've sort of talked about, you know, in the recent past is that
[Guest]: most of these smaller public sector banks, I mean, other than, let's say, the top five
[Guest]: or the top six, should not be allowed to carry out corporate lending, because which is where
[Guest]: the problem is.
[Guest]: I mean, 80% of the bad loans of public sector banks are because of lending to corporates.
[Guest]: So they should be, you know, what the jargon for this is narrow banking, I mean, they should
[Guest]: be limited to doing retail loans and stuff like that.
[Guest]: Now, there has been no such thinking, which is, you know, come out from the government.
[Guest]: So you know, you, you have a problem, and you continue to throw money at it, and the
[Guest]: money that you can throw at it is not enough to, you know, solve the problem, I mean, more
[Guest]: money is needed.
[Guest]: Now, where is that money going to come from?
[Guest]: I mean, nobody's talking about these things.
[Guest]: I mean, we've just done some, you know, basic patchwork, and we seem to be happy with it.
[Guest]: And you know, there are so many repercussions of this, which people don't understand.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, when you pump money into public sector banks, you don't have money
[Guest]: for, you know, a lot of other things.
[Guest]: So you know, recently, the, I think, the number two man in the army, the vice chief of army,
[Guest]: a gentleman called Lieutenant General Sarath Chand, told the parliamentary panel that 68%
[Guest]: of the army's equipment is in the vintage category.
[Guest]: And I'll quote him here, funds allocated are insufficient and the army is finding it difficult
[Guest]: to even stock arms, ammunition, spares for a 10 day intensive war.
[Guest]: All three services are expected to be prepared for at least 10 days of intensive battle.
[Guest]: I mean, I mean, this is a major problem.
[Amit Varma]: This is not trivial, and the money could have been spent here.
[Guest]: So you know, there is no reason to continue running, you know, all the, I mean, I can
[Guest]: understand the government cannot shut down a State Bank of India or a Bank of Baroda
[Guest]: or a, you know, Punjab National Bank or a Canara Bank, I mean, these are big banks.
[Guest]: But some of the smaller banks really do not, you know, form a large part of the Indian
[Guest]: banking system.
[Guest]: You know, banks like Indian Overseas Bank, Dina Bank, I mean, either the lending has
[Guest]: to be, you know, I mean, there's no real reason as to why the government continues
[Amit Varma]: to run.
[Amit Varma]: And even the bigger banks really should be privatized, because hey, I'm sick of paying
[Guest]: for them.
[Guest]: So yes.
[Guest]: So my larger point is, you know, when you when these things happen, the money has to
[Guest]: come from somewhere.
[Guest]: I mean, look at the fact that petrol prices are at a five year high, diesel is at an all
[Guest]: time high, even though oil prices are not nowhere near their all time high level.
[Guest]: So why is that happening?
[Guest]: Because the taxes that we pay on petrol and diesel have gone up quite a lot in the last
[Amit Varma]: four to five years, where is that money going?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this is one of the ironies of democracy, right?
[Amit Varma]: Every opposition party will claim to speak for the people.
[Guest]: But once they are in power, they'll try to enrich the state because that's the same things
[Guest]: which everyone else is doing.
[Guest]: So you know, I mean, there are so many of these larger factors which cannot be solved
[Guest]: through a banded approach.
[Guest]: I mean, you need some radical thinking, you need some radical decisions.
[Guest]: And these decisions obviously cannot be made now, you know, with elections, one year away,
[Amit Varma]: because
[Amit Varma]: they never intended to make them.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, honestly, their mindset, as you said, has been exactly the right.
[Guest]: So you know, you basically, you know, if any, the unpopular decisions typically tend to
[Guest]: be made, or should be made at least in the first couple of years, especially when you
[Guest]: have the kind of huge mandate that Mr. Modi had.
[Guest]: So I don't think, you know, any of the, you know, the so called second generation of reforms
[Guest]: as economists like to call it, have been pushed through, I mean, we continue to more or less
[Guest]: operate in the same way.
[Amit Varma]: Would you agree with this very cynical thought that just arose in my mind that it's often
[Amit Varma]: in a sense, pointless to talk about the performance of one specific government over another, because
[Amit Varma]: the point is that every party when they are in power will behave exactly the same way,
[Guest]: which is true.
[Guest]: I agree with that.
[Guest]: Because so which is why, so I mean, so typically, you know, what what happens is, and I talk
[Guest]: from experience here is to when when you write about, let's say, you know, you write a piece
[Guest]: and you're saying that, you know, Modi hasn't done this or whatever.
[Guest]: And then you know, people will ask you, but what did the Congress do?
[Guest]: I mean, yeah, which is true, the Congress also did not do anything, but that does not
[Guest]: justify Modi not doing anything.
[Amit Varma]: And vice versa.
[Amit Varma]: I in fact, keep saying that all water bountaries and admission of guilt, basically, when you
[Amit Varma]: ask what about you're saying, yeah, okay, I'm guilty as charged, but hey, you know,
[Guest]: what about those other guys?
[Guest]: So I mean, which is true, I mean, you know, the governments continue to operate in the
[Guest]: same way as they had in the past, at least on the economic front.
[Guest]: And I think a major reason for that is lies in the fact that, you know, I don't think
[Guest]: the economic situation of the country matters much when people go out to vote.
[Guest]: I mean, unless it's hitting them in the form of, you know, onion prices touching hundred
[Guest]: rupees, or petrol touching hundred rupees, you know, some of these issues tend to have,
[Amit Varma]: you know, a lot more, but otherwise, they've chosen the narratives they want to believe
[Amit Varma]: they've chosen the echo chamber they want to be part of and often the thinking therefore
[Amit Varma]: is tribal, tribal, not in a sense of actual tribes, but in terms of Okay, this is, this
[Guest]: is what I say.
[Guest]: So and you know, what what also happens is, at least I mean, I mean, I can only talk about
[Guest]: the middle and the upper middle class is that the upper middle class in India has always
[Unknown]: wanted a strong leader.
[Guest]: Now strong leader essentially is a euphemism they tend to use for a benevolent dictator.
[Guest]: And in their minds are, you know, countries like South Korea, China, Singapore, Taiwan,
[Guest]: which have actually done very well under not you wouldn't call them autocratic regimes,
[Guest]: but you know, probably slightly dictatorial.
[Guest]: So the problem is, you know, for every every China and every Singapore, there is a Zimbabwe
[Amit Varma]: as well.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: No.
[Amit Varma]: India is a one country in the world, I'm sure there are others, but India is one country
[Amit Varma]: where from the time I've been a kid, one book that you'll always find prominently displayed
[Amit Varma]: in bookshops and as a perennial bestseller in India is my calf.
[Amit Varma]: You know, there are so many people who will say, Hitler might have been whatever, but
[Guest]: the trains ran on time.
[Guest]: In fact, many publishers still, you know, continue to run their business because they
[Guest]: publish that book.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, so there you go, which is a telling commentary on the times but let's not end
[Amit Varma]: on that note instead, I'll end by asking you a couple of questions.
[Amit Varma]: Again, now this time leaving aside politics, because we've kind of agreed that every political
[Amit Varma]: party is disgraceful, and they'll do the same damn things in government driven as much by
[Amit Varma]: inertia as by their self interest.
[Amit Varma]: But broadly looking at the economy, looking at the direction that India is going in, what
[Amit Varma]: makes you a hopeful and be despair?
[Guest]: I mean, what makes me hopeful are essentially the people of this country, in the sense that
[Guest]: But we are an apathetic lot.
[Guest]: Not always.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, the fact that, you know, I mean, if you look at the last 25-30 years,
[Guest]: I mean, economic growth has happened because of the people, not because of the...
[Amit Varma]: I think the economic growth happened because of the IMF in 1991, they forced a set of conditions
[Guest]: on us.
[Guest]: Yes, they forced us and after that, you know, it's not like the government did anything
[Guest]: after that, you know, they did those one set of reforms, and then they, so yes, I mean,
[Guest]: so, you know,
[Amit Varma]: So you're saying the natural enterprise of the people will get us through?
[Guest]: The natural entrepreneurial, and you know, the fact that people will do what they want
[Guest]: to do.
[Guest]: And I think that gives us some hope.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Guest]: And what makes you despair?
[Guest]: What makes me despair is the constant apathy of the government, when they, you know, refuse
[Guest]: to sort of recognize even the most basic problems.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, India has a jobs problem.
[Guest]: And, you know, the way we've sort of handled it is by saying, you know, pakodawala is making
[Guest]: money and...
[Amit Varma]: That is not optics, you've given more importance to optics than anything else.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, I know.
[Guest]: I mean, so the optics, I mean, I guess the optics do matter.
[Guest]: I mean, obviously, every government is allowed to sort of, you know, control the optics,
[Guest]: but then, I mean, you cannot just keep controlling the optics and not address the, you know,
[Guest]: the real issues.
[Guest]: So look at, I mean, something like the right to education, and how it has sort of destroyed
[Guest]: the Indian education system.
[Guest]: Right, which was already in very bad shape.
[Amit Varma]: We have dear listeners, we have a couple of episodes on this also in the past, go to cnunseen.in,
[Amit Varma]: there are two old episodes on education, one of them on the right to education with Vivek.
[Guest]: Sorry.
[Guest]: So I, you know, we've been talking about it, but nothing seems to be, you know, done about
[Guest]: it, and meanwhile, a whole generation of Indians have passed through the Indian education system.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you do about that?
[Guest]: So you know, what happens is, whenever I talk about the fact that, you know, there is a
[Guest]: demographic dividend, and there are no jobs going around, people come to me and say, hey,
[Guest]: but I advertised and I did not get good candidates, which is the irony of the situation that even
[Guest]: people who sort of, you know, people who are going through the education system are not
[Amit Varma]: good enough to be recruited.
[Amit Varma]: This is again a point I keep making that education should really be a matter of supply and demand
[Amit Varma]: and there's a supply demand mismatch here that the education system is churning out
[Amit Varma]: people who are not suitable for the jobs that are there.
[Amit Varma]: So what's going wrong?
[Guest]: I mean, so you know, what's going wrong is the fact that there is no link between our
[Guest]: education and what is needed for people to sort of get a job.
[Amit Varma]: And also the government hasn't allowed private education to...
[Guest]: I mean, they've sort of in the past few years, they have, I mean, you couldn't, you can't
[Guest]: say they haven't allowed, but it's just that, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: For all practical purposes, I'd say they won't, because you still have those regulations that
[Guest]: you need a playground this size, you need so many toilets, blah, blah, blah.
[Guest]: No, that is more for the schooling thing.
[Guest]: What I'm trying to say here is that over the last few years, many private universities
[Guest]: have opened up, but they're not the kind which sort of, you know, teach the vocational courses,
[Unknown]: so to say.
[Guest]: I mean, it's like you need these, what the government calls the ITIs in the private sector,
[Guest]: you need people who are allowed to launch these ITIs and train people in basic things
[Guest]: like, you know, plumbing, masonry, becoming an electrician, so on and so forth, and I
[Guest]: mean, even that, for that matter, how to run a profitable pakora stall.
[Guest]: And you need to, you know, let them sort of make money out of it.
[Guest]: I mean, these courses cannot be three-year, four-year courses, they'll at best be ten
[Guest]: to twelve weeks in which they teach you, you know, the basic things and probably, you know,
[Guest]: have some sort of, you know, an arrangement where these people can be placed.
[Guest]: I mean, right now, if you look at, you know, the construction business, all construction
[Guest]: businesses need, you know, they need masons, they need electricians, they need plumbers.
[Guest]: I mean, believe me, finding a good plumber is very difficult these days.
[Amit Varma]: So I
[Guest]: Sounds like an upper middle class
[Guest]: No, it is.
[Guest]: It is.
[Guest]: I'm telling you, I mean, I got some plumbing work done recently, and I realized, you know,
[Guest]: how difficult it is to get a good plumber.
[Guest]: So I mean, that's a different thing.
[Guest]: But what I'm trying to say is that, you know, unless you let private guys thrive in the
[Guest]: education sector, and in the low-end education sector, which has started to happen with,
[Guest]: you know, with the entire skilling program that's going on, but again, the supply is
[Guest]: much less than the demand.
[Guest]: I mean, this, I guess, I mean, I looked at some numbers for last year.
[Guest]: I think that in 2016-17, not 17-18, the Ministry of Skilling trained some 9 lakh people, and
[Guest]: the target was close to 2 crore.
[Guest]: So yes, I mean, obviously, these things cannot be scaled up, you know, overnight, because,
[Amit Varma]: and I mean, you need teachers, you need teachers to teach those teachers.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I don't think this command and control structure of a Ministry of Skilling or whatever
[Guest]: really works, because it's not going to lead anywhere, you have to let private entrepreneurs
[Guest]: or let, you have to let people make money, and then they'll figure it out.
[Amit Varma]: On that exceptional note of hope, I mean, it's not a note of hope, but I'm just manipulating
[Amit Varma]: the optics here.
[Amit Varma]: On that bright and cheerful note of hope, Vivek, thanks so much for coming on the scene.
[Guest]: Thanks for having me, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, do go to amazon.in right now and do a search for
[Amit Varma]: Vivek Kaul.
[Amit Varma]: He's got the Easy Money trilogy, which we've discussed on the show, so you can listen to
[Amit Varma]: that podcast as well at sceneunseen.in, plus another great book called How Big Government
[Amit Varma]: Works.
[Amit Varma]: If you thought this episode was interesting, you have to read that book.
[Amit Varma]: You can also follow him on Twitter at Kaul underscore Vivek.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of the Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Goodbye for now.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the Scene and the Unseen, it makes complete sense for you
[Amit Varma]: to check out the Pragati podcast, a show on public policy.
[Amit Varma]: Pragati is a magazine I edit and the Pragati podcast is hosted by two of my colleagues,
[Amit Varma]: Pawan Srinath and Hamsini Hariharan.
[Amit Varma]: Every week, Pawan and Hamsini analyze views and news from India and the world and talk
[Amit Varma]: to experts and practitioners on a wide range of issues.
[Amit Varma]: Episodes out every Thursday, so there's your midweek fix right there.
[Unknown]: There she stands, a podcast addict, outside the bank, having traveled several miles to
[Unknown]: get in with other poor souls like her.
[Unknown]: The journey, though daunting for this youngling, will have some comfort because she has downloaded
[Unknown]: her favorite podcast.
[Unknown]: You can see more of her species on ivmpodcasts.com, your one-stop destination where you can check
[Unknown]: out the coolest Indian podcasts.
[Unknown]: Happy listening!